1. (5 points) What are the different types of dynamic RAM 
refresh?  Explain each.

2.  (10 points) Modify the 8203 interface design in Figure 5.35 
so that it will interface with the basic system project.  Design 
it with 32K Bytes (two banks of 2118 (16K x 1 bit)) dynamic 
memory addressed from 0x8000 to 0xFFFF.  Also use the advanced 
read mode of the 8203.

3. (5 points) Describe how a pseudostatic RAM (integrated RAM) 
functions?

4. (5 points) What is the early-write mode of the 2164? Explain 
with a timing diagram.  Why is it important?

5. (5 points) What are the six activities that all Interrupt 
Service Routines (ISRs) must include?   Briefly describe each. 

6. (10 points) Modify the 8259 interface design in Figure 7.29 so 
that it will interface with the basic system project.  Memory-map 
the 8259 at address 7000H.   Write the initialzation routine to 
program the 8259 to use interface eight level-triggered interrupt 
inputs.  The following jump table will be used to service the 
interrupts.
   Interrupt - Address - Opcode
     IR0        1700     JMP ISR0  ; Interrupt Service Routine    
     IR1        1704     JMP ISR1
     IR2 - 1708  JMP ISR2
     IR3 - 170C  JMP ISR3
     IR4 - 1710  JMP ISR4
     IR5 - 1714  JMP ISR5
     IR6 - 1718  JMP ISR6
     IR7 - 171C  JMP ISR7

7. (5 points) Briefly describe the DMA data transfer concept.  
Also, describe the different DMA transfer modes.

8. (10 points) Modify the 8237 interface design in Figure 7.38 so 
that it will interface with the basic system project.  I/O-map 
the 8237 at 16 consecutive I/O ports starting at port address 
10H.  Indicate any additional logic & buffering that would be 
necessary to connect the 8237 to the 8085 basic system.  

9. (10 points) What are the most common tools for locating 
microprocessor faults.  Describe briefly how each tool is used to 
locate faults.

10. (10 points)  Write a 8088 program that will add the 8 BCD 
digit number stored at 0700H through 0703H from the 8 BCD digit 
number stored at 0704H through 0707H.  Store the difference at 
0700H through 0703H.

11. (15 points) Design a completely buffered minimum mode 8088 
CPU module, using standard buffering devices 74LS373(s), 
74LS244(s), and 74LS245(s).  Provide separate buufered control 
lines for memory read, memory write, I/O read, I/O write.  
(Simular to Figure 12.7 for the 8086).

12. (10 points) Design a 1 Megabyte address space memory map for 
a 8088 processor so that there is:
     1.   64K byte read only memory segment of 32K byte (27256) 
EPROMs used for the monitor program and BIOS (Basic Input Output 
System).
     2.   64K byte static memory segment of 32K byte (62256) 
SRAMs used for the Interrupt Vectors and BIOS data and buffers.
     3.   320K reserved segment starting at address 0xA0000 for 
memory mapped IO devices, for example video memory.
     4.   dynamic memory segment for the rest of the address 
space. Determine how much dynamic memory will be available.  


  