1. (5 points) What are the three buses of the Three-Bus 
Architecture and describe the purpose of each.

2. (5 points) Draw a memory map for a microcomputer with 4K of 
EPROM memory at address 0000H, 2K of RAM at address 1000H,  16K 
of memory mapped I/O beginning at 4000H,  and 32K of Dynamic RAM 
at address 8000H.  Label all unused memory space as "open."

3. (5 points) How many total bytes does the following program 
segment require?  Also, how many clock cycles will the program 
segment require to execute.
     MVI   A,32H
     OUT   5
     STA   06FFH
     HLT

4. (5 points) Draw the Opcode fetch timing diagram for the 8085 
microprocessor and explain each control signal.

5. (5 points) What is pin #35 of the 8085 microprocessor and 
describe the function that it performs and how it is used.

6. (5 points) What is the SP register of the 8085 microprocessor 
programming model and describe the function it performs.

7. (5 points) The 8085 instruction ANI 40H will test bit 6 of 
register A. Explain why and what flag will be set.  Use the OR 
instruction to set bit 6 of register A without changing any of 
the other bits. Show the proper mnemonic.   

8. (5 points) Draw the mapping of the 8085 interrupts into low 
memory locations. Also specify the priority of each.

9. (10 points) Disassemble the following program by determining 
the proper mnemonics for the given hex codes.  Assume that the 
codes are found in memory beginning at address 0600H.
     0600 3E
     0601 3C
     0602 DB
     0603 03
     0604 17
     0605 D2
     0606 02
     0607 06
     0608 A0
     0609 D3
     060A 05
     060B 76

10. (10 points)  Write a program that will subtract the 8 BCD 
digit number stored at 0700H theough 0703H from the 8 BCD digit 
number stored at 0704H through 0707H.  Store the difference at 
0708H through 070BH.

11. (10 points) The address decoder in the basic system project 
decodes memory on 4K boundaries.  Therefore when the 6116 (2K 
Static RAM) is connected to location 1000H, it only uses 
addresses 1000H through 17FFH.  Design additional address 
decoding circuitry so that two 6116's can be connected to the 
basic project with the following addressing:
     6116A   1000H - 17FFH
and  6116B   1800H - 1FFFH

12. (10 points) Modify the 8255A interface design in Figure 7.6 
so that it will interface with the basic system project.  Memory-
map the 8255A at address 4000H. Write the initialization routine 
to program the 8255A for Mode 0 with port A as output and port B 
as input.    

13. (10 points) Modify the 8251A interface design in Figure 9.15 
so that it will interface with the basic system project. Memory-
map the 8251A at address 5000H. Write the initialization routine 
to program the 8251A for asynchronous transmission with 8 data 
bits, 2 stop bits, and no parity.  Also select a 16X clock and 
program DTR* and RTS* active.

14. (10 points) Modify the 8254 interface design in Figure 7.23 
so that it will interface with the basic system project as a Baud 
Rate Generator.  Memory-map the 8254 at address 6000H.  Connect 
Counter 0 to the 8085 system clock and to the 8251A Baud rate 
inputs.  Assume the 8085 is using a 4.9152MHz crystal.  Write the 
initialzation routine to program the 8254 Counter 0 for Mode 3 
(Square-wave generator), Binary, 16-Bits.  Use the initial count 
necessary to produce a baud rate of 9600 bps  (you can keep the 
count in decimal for the problem).    

  